Guides chapter (#192)
hadley/ggplot2-book: guides.Rmd

`r columns(2, 1 / 2)`
```{r markdown-with-ggtext}
base <- ggplot(toy, aes(up, up)) + 
  geom_point() + 
  scale_x_continuous("Axis title with *italics* and **boldface**")

base
base + theme(axis.title.x = ggtext::element_markdown())
```

Because tweaking axis and legend labels is such a common task, there are three 
helper functions in ggplot2 that can save you some typing. The first two are `xlab()` and `ylab()`, each of which takes a single argument that specifies the corresponding axis label. The `labs()` helper function is more flexible and can be used to set the name for one or more scale, using name-value pairs such as `x = "X axis"` or `fill = "fill legend"`. All three are illustrated below:

`r columns(2, 2/3)`
```{r guide-names-helper}
ggplot(toy, aes(const, up)) + 
  geom_point() + 
  xlab("X axis") + 
  ylab("Y axis")

ggplot(toy, aes(const, up)) + 
  geom_point(aes(colour = txt)) + 
  labs(x = "X axis", y = "Y axis", colour = "Colour\nlegend")
```

> There are two ways to remove the axis label. Setting it to `""` omits the label, but still allocates space; `NULL` removes the label and its space. Look closely at the left and bottom borders of the following two plots. I've drawn a grey rectangle around the plot to make it easier to see the difference.

Author: Probably an esoteric point, yeah. I'm tempted to keep the first two sentences and remove the example.

> There are two ways to remove the axis label. Setting it to `""` omits the label, but still allocates space; `NULL` removes the label and its space. Look closely at the left and bottom borders of the following two plots. I've drawn a grey rectangle around the plot to make it easier to see the difference.

Reviewer: That sounds good to me.

```{r guide-names-remove}
base <- ggplot(toy, aes(const, up)) + 
  geom_point() + 
  theme(plot.background = element_rect(colour = "grey50"))

base + labs(x = "",  y = "")
base + labs(x = NULL, y = NULL)
```

## Scale breaks and labels {#breaks-labels}

> In the same way that the `name` argument to a scale function governs axis titles and legend titles, the `breaks` argument is used to control which values appear as tick marks on axes and as keys on legends. Every break is associated with a label and these can be changed by setting the `labels` argument to the scale function. If you do set the `labels` argument, be sure to set `breaks` as well: if you don't and the data changes, the breaks will no longer align with the labels. The code below shows some basic examples for axes:

Author: okay I've been exploring this one and I think that framing around breaks vs labels is a little cleaner.

* `scales::breaks_log()`	creates breaks appropriate for log axes
* `scales::breaks_pretty()`	creates "pretty" breaks for date/times
* `scales::breaks_width()`	creates equally spaced breaks

See the documentation of the scales package for more detail.

### Adjusting minor breaks

You can adjust the minor breaks (the faint grid lines that appear between the major grid lines) by supplying a numeric vector of positions to the `minor_breaks` argument. This is particularly useful for log scales. First I'll create a vector of minor break values (on the transformed scale), using `%o%` to quickly generate a multiplication table and `as.numeric()` to flatten the table to a vector.
\index{Minor breaks}\index{Log!ticks}
```{r}
mb <- as.numeric(1:10 %o% 10 ^ (0:4))
```
The following plots illustrate the effect of setting the minor breaks:
`r columns(2, 2/3)`
```{r}
base <- ggplot(toy, aes(log, const)) + geom_point()

base + scale_x_log10()
base + scale_x_log10(minor_breaks = mb)
```
 
Note also that the scales package contains `minor_breaks_n()` and `minor_breaks_width()` functions that can be helpful in controlling the minor breaks.

### Date scales {#date-scales}

> A special case of interest occurs when an aesthetic is mapped to date or date/time data. In ggplot2 these are treated as continuous variables that have special labels, and there are some helper functions designed to make it easier to specify the breaks and labels for these scales. The ggplot2 package supports the `Date` (for dates) and `POSIXct` (for date/times) classes, as well as the `hms` class provided by the hms package [@hms]. If your dates are in a different format you will need to convert them using `as.Date()`, `as.POSIXct()` or `hms::as_hms()`. You may also find the toolkit provided by the lubridate package helpful to manipulate time and date data [@lubridate].

Author: I've gone with "time of day"? It feels closest to the intuitive notion of what hms does, but I admit it does feel a little unsatisfying in that it obscures the fact that hms is difftime under the hood. I don't like it but I can't think of anything better right now

> A special case of interest occurs when an aesthetic is mapped to date or date/time data. In ggplot2 these are treated as continuous variables that have special labels, and there are some helper functions designed to make it easier to specify the breaks and labels for these scales. The ggplot2 package supports the `Date` (for dates) and `POSIXct` (for date/times) classes, as well as the `hms` class provided by the hms package [@hms]. If your dates are in a different format you will need to convert them using `as.Date()`, `as.POSIXct()` or `hms::as_hms()`. You may also find the toolkit provided by the lubridate package helpful to manipulate time and date data [@lubridate].

Reviewer: I worry that's a bit misleading because it suggests that you couldn't have (e.g.) 57:29

> For appropriately formatted data mapped to the x aesthetic, ggplot2 will default to `scale_x_date()` and `scale_x_datetime()`, and there are similar scales for other aesthetics. In most respects date scales behave the same way as other continuous scales, but have some special behaviour that is worth noting. Specifically, in addition to the usual `breaks` and `labels` arguments, date scales have special `date_breaks` and `date_labels` arguments that allow you to work in date-friendly units:

Author: I can't see much in the documentation, but looking at the source it appears that `offset` is added after the `width` range is passed to `scales::fullseq()` so it needs to be something that can be added to a date object (numeric, difftime etc). I've mentioned this in the revised PR and given an example using a numeric offset. I'm not completely happy with it because the example feels longer than it needs to be, but I can't think of anything better right now

\index{Date/times} \index{Data!date/time} \index{Time} \index{Scales!date/time} \indexf{scale\_x\_datetime}

*   `date_breaks` and `date_minor_breaks()` allow you to position breaks by
    date units (years, months, weeks, days, hours, minutes, and seconds). 
    For example, `date_breaks = "2 weeks"` will place a major 
    tick mark every two weeks.

*   `date_labels` controls the display of the labels
    using the same formatting strings as in `strptime()` and `format()`. 
    To display dates like 14/10/1979, for example, you would use the 
    string `"%d/%m/%Y"`: in this expression `%d` produces a numeric 
    day of month, `%m` produces a numeric month, and `%Y` produces a 
    four digit year (the table at the end of this section provides a 

>     longer list of formatting strings)

Reviewer: Wonder if it's worth explicitly mentioning `"\n"` here? Then you can have (e.g.) month and year on separate lines.

One scenario where date formatting can be useful is when there is insufficient room to specify a four digit year. Using `%y` ensures that only the last two digits are displayed, as the example below illustrates:

`r columns(2, 1 / 2)`
```{r date-scale}
base <- ggplot(economics, aes(date, psavert)) + 
  geom_line(na.rm = TRUE) +
  labs(x = NULL, y = NULL)

base 
base + scale_x_date(date_labels = "%y", date_breaks = "5 years")
```

Additional examples are shown below:

```{r date-scale-2}
base + scale_x_date(
  limits = as.Date(c("2004-01-01", "2005-01-01")),
  date_labels = "%b %y",
  date_minor_breaks = "1 month"
)
base + scale_x_date(
  limits = as.Date(c("2004-01-01", "2004-06-01")),
  date_labels = "%m/%d",
  date_minor_breaks = "2 weeks"
)
```

> For an alternative approach, note that the scales package contains `label_dates()` and `label_dates_short()` that use the same formatting strings to specify the appearance of dates. The full list of strings recognised is:

Author: oooh it's so preeeeettttty :heart_eyes:

## Scale guides {#scale-guide}

> The previous sections describe features of ggplot2 that are the same for both axes and legend, but because legends are more complex than axes, there are additional topics to discuss that pertain only (or mostly) to legends. ggplot2 is designed so that in most cases the default legends will be sensible, but even so it is often necessary to override the defaults. You can do this using the `guide` argument of the corresponding scale function, or more conveniently, the `guides()` helper function. 

Reviewer: This is no longer true since we have `guide_axis()` now. So maybe reframe to something like "scales allow you to control the high-level details of the guides, but if you want to control the details, you'll need to use the guide functions"

The `guides()` helper works in a similar way to the `labs()` helper function described in Section \@ref(scale-name). Both take the name of different aesthetics (e.g., color, x, fill) as arguments and allow you to specify your own value. Where `labs()` provides a shorthand way to specify the `name` argument to one or more scales, the `guides()` function allows you to specify `guide` arguments to one or more scales. In the same way that `labs(colour = "a colour scale name")` specifies the name associated with the colour scale, a command such as `guides(colour = guide_coloursteps())` can be used to specify its associated guide:

`r columns(3)`
```{r}
base <- ggplot(mpg, aes(displ, hwy, colour = cyl)) + geom_point()

base 
base + scale_colour_continuous(guide = guide_coloursteps())
base + guides(colour = guide_coloursteps())
```

> However, scale guides are more complex than scale names: where the `name` argument (and hence the `labs()` helper function) takes text as input, the `guide` argument (and `guides()` helper) expect you to create a guide object using a **guide function** such as `guide_colourbar()` and `guide_legend()`. These functions offer the user additional control over the fine details of the legend. Legend guides can be used for any aesthetic (discrete or continuous) while the colour bar guide can only be used with continuous colour scales. 

Reviewer: Should we have a table that shows what determine which guide you get by default?

> The guide functions have numerous examples in their documentation help pages that illustrate all of their arguments. Most of the arguments to the guide function control the fine level details of the text colour, size, font etc. You'll learn about those in the themes chapter. Here I'll focus on the most important arguments.

Reviewer: Generally, you won't need to use these arguments unless you want one guide to look different to the others.

```

### `guide_coloursteps()`

This "colour steps" guide is a version of `guide_colourbar()` appropriate for binned colour and fill scales. It shows the area between breaks as a single constant colour, rather than displaying a colour gradient that varies smoothly along the bar. Arguments mostly mirror those for `guide_colourbar()`. The additional arguments are as follows:

*   `show.limits` indicates whether values should be shown at the ends of the stepped colour bar (analogous to the corresponding argument in `guide_bins()`)

    `r columns(2)`
    ```{r}
    base <- ggplot(mpg, aes(displ, hwy, colour = cyl)) + 
      geom_point() + 
      scale_color_binned()

    base + guides(colour = guide_coloursteps(show.limits = TRUE))
    base + guides(colour = guide_coloursteps(show.limits = FALSE))
    ```

*   `ticks` is a logical variable indicating whether tick marks should be displayed adjacent to the legend labels (default is `NULL`, in which case the value is inherited from the scale)

*   `even.steps` is a logical variable indicating whether bins should be evenly spaced (default is `TRUE`) or proportional in size to their frequency in the data

### `guide_axis()`

> Guide functions exist mostly to control plot legends, but---as legends and axes are both kinds of guide---ggplot2 also supplies a `guide_axis()` function for axes. Its main purpose is to modify thematic properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Guide functions exist mostly to control plot legends, but---as legends and axes are both kinds of guide---ggplot2 also supplies a `guide_axis()` function for axes. Its main purpose is to provide additional controls to prevent labels from overlapping:
```

`r columns(2, 2/3)`
```{r}
ggplot(toy, aes(up, up)) + 
  geom_point(size = 4, colour = "grey20") +
  geom_point(aes(colour = txt), size = 2) 

ggplot(toy, aes(up, up)) + 
  geom_point(size = 4, colour = "grey20", show.legend = TRUE) +
  geom_point(aes(colour = txt), size = 2) 
```

ggplot2 tries to use the fewest number of legends to accurately convey the aesthetics used in the plot. It does this by combining legends where the same variable is mapped to different aesthetics. The figure below shows how this works for points: if both colour and shape are mapped to the same variable, then only a single legend is necessary. \index{Legend!merging}

`r columns(3)`
```{r legend-merge}
ggplot(toy, aes(const, up)) + geom_point(aes(colour = txt))
ggplot(toy, aes(const, up)) + geom_point(aes(shape = txt))
ggplot(toy, aes(const, up)) + geom_point(aes(shape = txt, colour = txt))
```

> In order for legends to be merged, they must have the same `name`. So if you change the name of one of the scales, you'll need to change it for all of them.

Reviewer: Maybe this is worth an example? It's a common source of confusion.

### Splitting legends

> Splitting a legend is a much less common data visualisation task. In general it is not advisable to map one aesthetic (e.g. colour) to multiple variables, and so by default ggplot2 does not allow you to "split" the colour aesthetic into multiple scales with separate legends. Nevertheless, there are exceptions to this general rule, and it is possible to override this behaviour using the ggnewscale package [@ggnewscale]. The `ggnewscale::new_scale_colour()` command acts as an instruction to ggplot2 to initialise a new colour scale: scale and guide commands that appear above the `new_scale_colour()` command will be applied to the first colour scale, and commands that appear below are applied to the second colour scale. 

Reviewer: Add link to package website?
